JOHN YANG: Good evening.
I'm John Yang.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: a deep dive into
the president-elect's overseas businesses,
and how those economic ties could influencethe Trump administration.
Then, as Cubans mourn the death of communist
leader Fidel Castro, how newly-restored relations
between U.S. and Cuba could change under a
Trump presidency.
And the costs of moving on.
Abandoned coal sites wreak havoc on the environmentand country's checkbooks.
ERIC CAVAZZA, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection: They can catch on fire.
This particular pile isn't burning that we
are aware of, but many of these do catch on
fire.
JOHN YANG: All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JOHN YANG: President-elect Trump returned
to work at the Trump Tower in New York City
today, where he's assembling a Cabinet.
Mr. Trump's team got back to business afterthe Thanksgiving holiday.
MIKE PENCE (R), Vice President-Elect: Going
to be a busy week.
Get ready.
Buckle up.
JOHN YANG: Perhaps keeping an eye on Wisconsin,
where election officials approved a recount.
In less than a week, Green Party nominee Jill
Stein raised more than $6.5 million for recounts
in Wisconsin, in Pennsylvania, where Stein
filed paperwork today, and in Michigan, which
just today certified its election result,
an 11,000-vote win for Mr. Trump.
Hillary Clinton's campaign is now part of
the recount effort.
Last week, Stein told the "NewsHour" the pointisn't to change the outcome.
JILL STEIN, Green Party Presidential Candidate:
I don't think that's likely, and this is not
being done to benefit one candidate at the
expense of the other.
JOHN YANG: The president-elect made his own
election claim, tweeting that millions of
people voted illegally, but offered no evidence.
Today, the focus was on the transition.
Former CIA Director David Petraeus visited.
Tomorrow, a second meeting with Mitt Romney,once a vocal Trump critic.
Both are among those mentioned for secretary
of state.
One top Trump adviser is openly campaigning
against Romney.
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Senior Adviser: People
feel betrayed to think that Governor Romney,
who went out of his way to question the character
and the intellect and the integrity of Donald
Trump, now our president-elect, would be given
the most prominent Cabinet post of all, secretary
of state.
JOHN YANG: A message she said she's also delivered
in private.
In the day's other news: Russia's Defense
Ministry estimates that the Syrian regime
forces now control about 40 percent of rebel-held
Eastern Aleppo, after days of heavy fighting.
Government troops, backed by Russian airstrikes,
captured a key neighborhood today, putting
much of the city's north in their hands forthe first time in four years.
Meanwhile, thousands of residents have fled
the area, as aid groups warn of an ever-worsening
humanitarian crisis.
Cuba is in mourning today for its late leader
Fidel Castro.
The 90-year-old died Friday night, after being
in ill health for years.
Today, thousands lined up in Havana's Plaza
of the Revolution to pay their respects at
a memorial for the man who ruled their countryfor nearly half-a-century.
We will have more on Castro's death and what
it may mean for Cuba's future later in the
program.
Back in this country, a knife-wielding attacker
wounded at least 11 people at Ohio State University
in Columbus.
Authorities said the man was a student there
and of Somali descent.
He rammed his car into a crowd, and then stabbed
people with a butcher knife, before being
shot dead by police.
Dozens of officers rushed to the scene, while
the campus of some 60,000 students was put
on lockdown for several hours.
DR.
MICHAEL DRAKE, President, Ohio State University:
We don't know anything that would link this
to any community.
We certainly don't any evidence that would
say that is the case.
And what we want to do is really unify together,
support each other, do our best to support
those who were injured in their recovery,
and then allow the investigation to take place.
JOHN YANG: Police are now investigating the
suspect's motive, including whether it was
an act of terrorism.
The suspect in the Charleston church shooting
will be allowed to represent himself at his
trial.
Dylann Roof made that request, against his
lawyers' advice.
The trial judge granted it, but called Roof's
decision unwise.
The 22-year-old is accused of killing nineblack parishioners last year.
Meanwhile, jury selection got under way.
Federal prosecutors are seeking the death
penalty.
And stocks tumbled on Wall Street today, as
the post-election market rally appeared to
ease.
The Dow Jones industrial average lost 54 pointsto close just under 19098.
The Nasdaq fell 30 points, and the S&P 500
slipped 11.
Still to come on the "NewsHour": a look at
president-elect Trump's business interests
across the globe; our Politics Monday team
on the pending election recount; France moves
to the right in its own presidential contest;
and much more.
Next, to a closer look at president-elect
Trump's business interests and potential conflicts
that may arise when he takes office.
William Brangham has more -- William.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Thanks, John.
Indeed, many analysts believe we are in unprecedented
territory here, where a man with active financial
dealings in at least 20 different countries
is about to become president of the United
States.
The New York Times just did a deep dive into
Donald Trump's global businesses and how it
could intersect with his presidency.
Eric Lipton is one of the reporters on thatstory, and he joins me now.
Eric Lipton, thank you very much for being
here.
I mentioned this term unprecedented.
Is that a fair characterization, in your mind,
where we have a businessman who is so well
connected in so many nations moving into the
White House?
ERIC LIPTON, The New York Times: I think so.
I have spoken with quite a number of presidential
historians who say that they see nothing like
this in American history.
And it's not just the assets he owns, because
the list of properties that he owns 100 percent
is not that huge, but it's the relationships
that he has with businesses globally through
branding arrangements in which he is paid
a fee or a commission for those deals.
And so he still has a financial relationship
and business partners in many countries, particular
in the developing world.
And the concern, I think, is more in the developing
world, where you have a history of oftentimes
corners being cut to powerful people with
economic interests.
That's where the real problem is, less so
in like Western Europe, for example.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, let's talk about -- before
we get into the details of some of the countries
specifically, broadly speaking, what do you
see as the main conflicts of interests here?
What's the problem?
ERIC LIPTON: To me, there's two primary things.
One is sort of a broad thing, which is that
the United States for decades has played a
leading role globally to try to encourage
nations to separate their political from economic
power, so that there is greater transparency,
that everyone has an equal shots at contracts,
and that there aren't payments for permits
or contracts.
It's been something that both Democrats and
Republicans have really rallied and pressured
other foreign governments.
There is the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.
There's been all kinds of prosecutions of
companies that have been involved in any type
of a payment to get a contract.
And the United States has been a preacher
on this.
And the fact now that you have a president
who is mixing the financial matters with the
political matters and that his business interests
are going to overlap with U.S. foreign policy
really undermines that message that the United
States has worked so hard across bipartisanly.
The second thing is that no matter how ethical
the Trump family is and President Trump himself,
there is going to be intense pressure on officials
in these foreign places to do things for him
even if he doesn't ask for it in a way to
try to impress President Trump or his administration
or the White House to get some type of special
treatment.
They may not succeed in that, but there is
an incentive for them to accelerate a permit,
to grant access to a piece of land that he
really wants that's going to help his company,
to buy memberships at a golf club, to do various
things.
Now, he says, well, how can you blame me if
people are doing things I don't ask them for?
But he and his family potentially are going
to be enriched by these favors that will be
granted to them, even if they don't request
it.
And so even if they're completely moral, given
that there's these relationships, it seems
like it could present a problem.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You document so many different
interesting examples of where these possible
conflicts could arise.
Let's talk about one of them, specifically
the Philippines.
In your piece, you introduce us to man named
Jose E.B.
Antonio.
Who is he and why is he important in this
story?
ERIC LIPTON: So, he is essentially the brand
representative for the Trump family in the
Philippines.
Often, when they have major projects in certain
countries, they have essentially a person
who helps represent their whole business enterprise
there.
So he is in charge of building a major new
skyscraper in -- and outside Manila.
So he is -- but the problem for Donald Trump
and for these questions about potential conflicts
is that he was recently appointed by the president
of the Philippines to simultaneously serve
as the Philippines' envoy to the United States.
So here you have a guy who is the partner,
business partner of Donald Trump, and the
government official that is helping represent
the government of the Philippines in its relationship
with the United States.
And the Philippines' relationship with the
United States is a very complicated one right
now.
You have got a president who's ordered essentially
the extrajudicial killing of drug dealers
in that country to try to crack down on crime.
And, again, you certainly want drug dealers
to be arrested, taken of the streets, but
you don't and go kill them before they have
a trial.
The State Department has been incredibly critical
of what's been happening in the Philippines
with respect to these people simply[ being
shot down and killed on the streets.
And what's going to happen when you have President
Trump, where his business partner is an official
in the government of the Philippines?
Is Trump still going to be as willing to potentially
alienate his business partner and complicate
his business deals in the Philippines and
challenge the government of the Philippines?
That's an open question.
But at least in the back of his head, youwonder, will that be a factor?
Will that influence foreign policy becausehe's a business associate there?
It seems like, how's that not going to be
a factor?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, Eric Lipton of
The New York Times, really incredible piece
of reporting.
And there's many more examples in the story
that you ran.
They can find that on The New York Times Web
site.
Thank you so much for the reporting and thanks
for being here.
ERIC LIPTON: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: Time now for Politics Monday.
Here to discuss the latest developments, Amy
Walter of The Cook Political Report and Tamara
Keith of NPR.
Welcome to you both.
For two weeks, no one questioned the outcome
of this election.
Now, all of a sudden, we have got recounts
Jill Stein wants, even though she says she
doesn't think it will change the outcome,
and now president-elect Trump is saying that
there were millions of illegitimate votes,
even though he doesn't offer us any evidence.
Tam, what's going on?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public Radio: And he'snot disputing that he won.
He's just saying, maybe I would have won the
popular vote, too.
So I was on a call this morning with the Trump
transition team.
I asked them for evidence, like actual evidence,of millions of illegal votes.
Or also he was claiming election fraud in
three states.
Where is the evidence in those states?
What they presented was a report, study from
2014 that has been thoroughly debunked.
And they also presented a Pew Research Study
that was about voter rolls and housekeeping
that could be done in voter rolls.
Neither of those things point to widespread
voter fraud in 2016.
So his transition team has been unable to
offer any evidence of what is clearly nonexistent
voter fraud that they're talking about.
And Jill Stein, for that matter, hasn't been
able to offer any evidence of voter fraud.
It's more like, this happened, and this happened,
and this happened, so we should look into
it, is all she's saying.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political Report: Right.
And that goes to, I think, heart of matter
here, which is, you have two people.
One is the president of the United States.
The other is a Green Party candidate who obviously
didn't win many votes, both suggesting that
the voting system itself is illegitimate or
rigged without any proof of this.
Jill Stein's case is that maybe it's been
hacked by foreign influencers, Russia, for
example.
That is a big charge to make.
And when you undermine our voting process,
you are undermining the cornerstone of our
democracy.
Right?
People trust that their votes are going to
be counted correctly.
And then you also delegitimize winners of
every election, whether you're voting for
president or city council or whatever it is.
Well, how do I know John Yang really won,
because the system could have been rigged?
JOHN YANG: But Jill Stein and her campaign
for presidency raised $3.5 million.
AMY WALTER: Right.
JOHN YANG: In a week, she has raised about$6.5 million for this recount.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
Yes.
JOHN YANG: What does that say?
You talk about making the -- questioning the
legitimacy.
What does say that about...
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: That controversy sells.
There is a big segment of the electorate that
believes and has believed for some time that
the system itself should be put into the question.
Remember, after the 2000 election and the
hanging chads and the butterfly ballots, Congress
actually dealt with this.
There was real concern that there were problem
with these machines that were old and broken.
And Congress said -- they passed a bill called
the Help America Vote Act, donated money -- or
actually gave federal funds to the statesto update their machines.
But it doesn't mean that people feel better
about the machines just because Congress now
has appropriated more money to help make them
more up to date.
JOHN YANG: Another what's going on moment
to me was the -- over the weekend, Kellyanne
Conway goes on Twitter, goes on national television
to essentially campaign against her boss,
the president-elect, picking Donald Trump.
She can make this advice private.
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, picking Mitt Romney to
be secretary of state.
JOHN YANG: I'm sorry.
Picking Mitt Romney.
I'm sorry.
TAMARA KEITH: Which hasn't yet happened.
But Mitt Romney does have another meeting
scheduled at Trump Tower with Donald Trump.
He's one of several people in the mix.
Now, Mitt Romney was a very outspoken critic
of Donald Trump in the primary process and
said some very tough things about Donald Trump,
many of which were true.
But Kellyanne Conway expresses a viewpoint
that I think many Trump loyalists have, that,
why would you bring in this guy who insulted
you?
But it is odd to have someone who speaks for
Donald Trump seemingly on television both
speaking for him and speaking to him?
But leading up to the election, KellyanneConway did some of this as well.
She, at times, was tweeting things that seemed
to be like a subtweet of something that her
boss was saying and at others times seemed
to be directly communicating through him through
television, because he is an avid viewer of
television, cable news and the Sunday shows.
But the thing that is also interesting is
that then this morning there was a leak from
somebody else in the campaign saying, well,
Donald Trump was very upset about what Kellyanne
Conway said.
We don't know which of -- we don't know whether
Kellyanne Conway was coordinating with Donald
Trump or whether he really was upset or whether
all of these leaks and statements are part
of, you know, an elaborate effort to make
sure that Mitt Romney isn't secretary of state.
AMY WALTER: And this is the bigger challenge
that we have had.
And we have talked about this before, which
is, we have a president-elect who's yet to
hold a press conference, hasn't held one since
July and certainly has not held one since
winning.
We don't have anything to talk about thenin terms of his policies.
We haven't heard about his legislative agenda
he wants to put forward.
So all we have in front of us is this sort
of "Apprentice"-style game about who's going
to be in his Cabinet.
Some of them are going to make a big difference.
Many of them, we're never going to talk about
ever again.
His policies are the thing that we should
be spending the most time talking about, and
yet it seems as if we're not going to get
any indication of that until he's sworn in
as president.
And even then, it's unclear if we are goingto see this same behavior occur.
Well, he thinks this, but then somebody goes
on TV and says that, and somebody else is
countering behind the scenes over here.
JOHN YANG: Right, whether we going to have
Cabinet officers going on television to lobby
him.
AMY WALTER: Right.
JOHN YANG: Well, what do we know?
From the names he's picked so far, what does
that suggest or what can you conclude about
how he's going to govern as president?
AMY WALTER: Well, I want to be careful to
read too much into it, because, again, the
Cabinet picks often are not as big of a deal
later on as they are right now, when we don't
have much to talk about.
But he has at least four people, Jeff Sessions,
Reince Priebus, Michael Flynn, and Ben Carson,
who are loyalists, who were with him on thecampaign trail every single day.
Those are the kinds of people that he surroundedhimself with immediately.
The only person would fall into the not really
always on the team, maybe sort of team of
rival type would be Nikki Haley, who, of course,
would be -- is going to be the U.N. secretary.
It's interesting with Mitt Romney as well.
These are the people that are outfacing, right,
the people that we're showing to the rest
of the world, Haley, Mitt Romney, vs. the
people that are closest to him, whether as
his chief of staff or the attorney general.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
And Sessions, he's a hard-liner or immigration
in particular, helped Donald Trump develop
his immigration policy, which is definitely
not in line with what the establishment Republicans
thought would be the Gang of 8 immigration
reform.
This is definitely a very hard line.
So, there is a mix of hard-liners and slightly
more establishment people, like a Betsy DeVos
for education.
AMY WALTER: For education.
JOHN YANG: And we will get more names this
week.
Amy Walter, Tamara Keith, thanks for joining
us.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JOHN YANG: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the future of
Cuban-American relations after Fidel Castro;
and the cost of cleaning up abandoned coal
mines.
But first: France's center-right party has
chosen social conservative Francois Fillon
as its presidential candidate in next spring's
elections
Then, he could face Marine Le Pen, leaderof the far-right National Front.
The deeply unpopular current president, Francois
Hollande of the Socialist Party, has not yet
said whether he will seek reelection.
Le Pen's National Front hopes to benefit from
the so-called Trump effect, as special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant discovered when he discovered
one of its strongholds in Northern France.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Despite being labeled a medieval
conservative, Francois Fillon won the Republican
nomination in France's first ever U.S.-styleprimary by more than 2-1.
FRANCOIS FILLON, French Presidential Candidate
(through translator): Victory is mine.
It's a substantial victory built on convictions.
France wants the truth, and it wants action.
MALCOLM BRABANT: According to analyst Alexandra
de Hoop Scheffer, Fillon is a fiscal conservative
with a record of consistency.
ALEXANDRA DE HOOP SCHEFFER, The German Marshall
Fund: He has strong positions in terms of
reducing French public spending.
He wants to suppress around 500,000 public
sector jobs.
He has always stuck to the same positions
on many issues.
He's pro-Russian.
He says it very clearly.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Most French commentators
expect the Socialist presidential candidate
to be eliminated early in next year's election.
At this bastion of the National Front, Henin-Beaumont,
they now know who their main opponent is.
Steeve Briois is the town's mayor and the
second most important person in the party.
STEEVE BRIOIS, Mayor of Henin-Beaumont (through
translator): There's a global phenomenon today,
an awakening.
The people are rebelling against the elite.
So it's a good thing that Mr. Trump was elected.
It's a good thing that Brexit happened in
Britain.
It bodes well for us for France.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This is France's Rust Belt,
northeast of Paris.
Slag heaps and heavy machinery preserved in
industrial museums are all that remain of
coal mines shut down two decades ago.
There's high unemployment.
The working class here have followed a familiar
political route of abandoning socialists like
President Francois Hollande for right-wing
populists.
MARINE TONDELIER, Green Party: The Front National
is like a vulture party.
That is simply that shows something that is
decreasing, poor, complicated, and it tries
to seize it, and it's exactly what they did
here.
EUGENE BINAISSE, Former Mayor (through translator):
A wall of silence has descended on the town.
We think we're being observed by the National
Front, and anything you say can come back
and bite you.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The National Front was founded
by Jean-Marie Le Pen, who famously described
the Holocaust as a detail of history.
He was expelled from the party last year by
his daughter Marine, as she sought to soften
its image as one of the most extreme right-wing
groups in Europe.
France has the largest Muslim population in
Western Europe, estimated at between 5 to
10 percent of the population.
In Beziers, a National Front stronghold in
the south, the administration counted Muslim
children, contrary to strict secularist laws.
But according to Marine Tondelier, a councillor
in Henin-Beaumont, the mayor here has not
conformed to expectations.
MARINE TONDELIER: Here, you don't have theimmigration question so much.
Even the Front National mayor is helping the
mosque.
When we have got the terrorist attacks in
Charlie Hebdo, they do a demonstration with
the Muslim people to show that they were united.
So it's not so much a problem.
It's a problem with the Front National in
the South of France.
But the Front National, it's like a chameleon
party, so they adapt to the city in which
they are.
MALCOLM BRABANT: At the moment, your critics
say that you're actually being very nice to
immigrants here, but is this because you'retrying to show a nice face now?
And will things change if you get into power
nationally?
STEEVE BRIOIS (through translator): Because
the state has capitulated, foreigners who
come to France do whatever they want today.
We're now seeing them retreat into their own
communities, and that's not good for France.
It's not good for the republic.
That creates disorder.
That's why one must have the courage to limit
immigration to the absolute minimum.
We can't welcome anymore.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But while some may find this
rhetoric disconcerting, it doesn't trouble
Abdelatif Kouba, a French national of Algerian
origin who runs a halal butcher's in the main
square.
ABDELATIF KOUBA, France (through translator):
Why be afraid?
I don't understand.
I think the National Front is like any other
party.
The media exaggerate everything.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But Pascal Wallart does have
a problem.
He runs the district office of "La Voix du
Nord," a newspaper that supported the resistance
during the Second World War.
Last year, the paper published an editorial
saying that Marine Le Pen would be dangerous
for France.
The National Front administration in the town
hall cut off relations immediately.
PASCAL WALLART, "La Voix du Nord" (through
translator): They want to control the entire
communication process.
I will not use the word fascist, but we're
not far from it.
But there's a totalitarian attitude to muzzling
communication.
Here, evil has been done, and it will remain
for a long time.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Although Henin-Beaumont is
National Front territory, it was hard to find
people at the market who were willing to support
them on camera.
MAN (through translator): I don't think we
should be more afraid of the National Front
than any other party.
No one's worse or better.
MALCOLM BRABANT: France's Socialist prime
minister, Manuel Valls, believes the world
has changed since Donald Trump's victory.
He believes it boosts the chances of Marine
Le Pen, the National Front leader, of winning
the presidential election in France next May.
Now, Valls believes that Trump's success and
the Brexit vote demonstrate the need of politicians
to listen to angry citizens, especially when
it comes to issues like immigration.
And he believes that the rise of populists
and the far-right has been made possible by
politicians who are too scared to take tough
decisions.
But Francois Fillon has convinced voters in
the primaries that, as president, he will
back up his tough talk with action by disbanding
extreme Islamic groups.
FRANCOIS FILLON (through translator): My friends,
radical Islam is undermining our fellow Muslim
citizens.
It infiltrates them, takes them hostage.
They hate what we are.
So, I tell you, I will fight them withoutrespite and without mercy.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Analyst de hoop Scheffer
believes the National Front's Marine Le Pen
may suffer because of a French backlash against
Donald Trump.
ALEXANDRA DE HOOP SCHEFFER: I don't think
that Donald Trump's election in the U.S. will
actually help her.
I believe that it's maybe the contrary.
It might undermine her.
And the fact that a significant part of the
French population actually went out and vote
in the center-right primary was, to me, a
very strong signal in terms of the French
not wanting to see Marine Le Pen run France
in 2017.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Historically, the far right
has been squeezed out by the center-right
and left combining and voting tactically.
Some analysts believe Francois Fillon's brand
of conservatism may repel Socialists.
At the town hall in Henin-Beaumont, they hope
this will create an opening for the National
Front.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Malcolm Brabant
in France.
JOHN YANG: The last two years have seen athaw in U.S.-Cuba relations.
But could the death of Fidel Castro and the
election of Donald Trump jeopardize the warming
trend that President Obama started?
Here's Jeffrey Brown.
JEFFREY BROWN: In Havana, a 21-gun salute
marked the official start of a week of mourning
for Cuba's revolutionary leader.
University students took to the streets, chanting
his name, and long lines snaked around Havana's
Plaza of the Revolution, as Cubans waited
their turn to pay tribute to the man who brought
a communist-run state within 100 miles of
the U.S.
LUIS ALVAREZ, Cuba (through translator): Fidel
has been the biggest thing in my life, for
me and for all Cubans.
The new generations have to learn to be like
him, because he gave everything to us, everything.
JEFFREY BROWN: Damien Cave is there reporting
for The New York Times.
DAMIEN CAVE, The New York Times: It's a mix
of sadness, and then also a relief, to some
degree, for many.
It almost feels like the whole city or the
whole country has just exhaled enormously,
and is both trying to kind of make sense of
the past, and also figure out a way to move
forward.
One chapter is closed and another chapteris open, someone said to me.
It's not the full tale, but this definitely
feels like a turning point, at least symbolically.
JEFFREY BROWN: In Miami's Little Havana neighborhood,
a very different scene, one of jubilation,
as the children and grandchildren of those
who fled Castro's rule say his death marks
a new beginning.
MAN: I don't celebrate death, but I celebrate
the death of a tyrant.
WOMAN: Now is the time.
And it's definitely in the hands of the young
people to take it over.
JEFFREY BROWN: Whatever comes next for Cuba
and the U.S., there was one new link formed
today: The first commercial flight from Miami
landed in Havana.
And now to that question of future U.S.-Cuba
relations, we're joined first by Senator Amy
Klobuchar, Democrat from Minnesota.
Welcome to you, Senator.
Is it time now to move ahead with the re-engagement
that President Obama began or a time to take
a pause with the death of Fidel Castro?
SEN.
AMY KLOBUCHAR (D), MINNESOTA: Well, I think
it's time to move ahead.
This has been 50-some years of a failed policy.
And both the Cuban people and the American
people are really ahead of many of the people
in their own government.
Congress has sat on this for years, and I
think it's time to lift the embargo.
The death of Fidel Castro, of course, is not
as significant when you first look at it,
because Raul Castro, his brother, has been
in power for years.
But, in fact, he's been a looming figure even
during his illness that I think has made a
difference in holding us back in trying to
open up more negotiations and move ahead with
opening up relations between our two countries.
JEFFREY BROWN: Donald Trump, of course, has
threatened to reimpose some of the sanctions
that President Obama lifted.
Isn't it likely that he will be under pressure
to keep some of those campaign promises now?
SEN.
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Well, I hope that at least
this death of Fidel Castro causes him to pause
and take some time to look at this, because
you have so many Americans now wanting to
visit there, visiting there.
You have ag interests down there.
And you have the Cuban people.
Everywhere I went on my visits with the president
and with Secretary Kerry, there was artwork,
and it would have the number and date December
17.
And I thought, what's that?
Is that some Castro birthday?
It was actually the date President Obama and
Raul Castro started to open diplomatic relations,
and that is so significant to the Cuban people,
because they are, many of them, entrepreneurs,
many of them very friendly to America.
And I think this is an opportunity for the
Cubans.
It's the only way we are going to change their
democratic and human rights situation, and
certainly an opportunity for Americans, 11
million people 90 miles off our shore, forecast
that five million Americans would visit every
year.
And, of course, we would then be able to export
products as well if we lifted our -- the embargo
with our bipartisan bill.
JEFFREY BROWN: But I wonder also, in countering
the critics, can you point to specific changes,
political changes, in Cuba to say that this
re-engagement has at least started to work,
that we should continue with it?
What would you say?
SEN.
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Well, I think that there is
a lot more interest between our countries.
There are still people that have been held
for human rights that shouldn't be held for
just speaking their mind.
Of course, there were some releases immediately.
Alan Gross and others were released, but there
are still people that are being imprisoned.
So, I don't want to be a Pollyanna about this.
I just think what we have been doing hasn't
been working.
And when we are this close to the country
and there is so much cross-interest between
the two countries, you have got the Catholic
Church playing a major role, the pope a force
behind this and wanting to lift the embargo,
I think all these things are on our side.
And that's why President Obama has been leading
the way, because, otherwise, the people will
get in front of us here.
And I think it's time to change this policy.
JEFFREY BROWN: And just very briefly, how
do you see the legacy of Fidel Castro now?
SEN.
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Well, obviously, it is a legacy
of very difficult situations for many people
in his own country.
There are still a lot of people living in
poverty.
They have major issues with not having enough
food.
That's why we're able to send some food down
there under a humanitarian exemption.
And he's killed people, basically, in order
to support the dictatorship that he ran for
so long.
So, I don't see that has a positive legacy.
But what I do see is Cuban people that arejust -- want to see change.
They are vibrant.
They are trying to fix up old cars, so they
can start their tourism businesses.
There's hundreds of thousands of small companies
that have already started under some exceptions
that Raul Castro has put into place.
So, I see a country that is on the cusp of
change, and we should be helping that change,
instead of continuing an old policy that hasn't
worked.
JEFFREY BROWN: Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota,
thank you very much.
SEN.
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you.
It's great to be on, Jeff.
JEFFREY BROWN: And now a very different view
from Ana Quintana, a policy analyst at the
Heritage Foundation, and herself a first-generation
Cuban American.
Welcome to you.
ANA QUINTANA, Heritage Foundation: Thanks
for having me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Your description of the legacy
of Fidel Castro?
ANA QUINTANA: Well, mine isn't quite as positive.
I believe it's one of tyranny.
It's one of tens of thousands of people being
murdered.
And, I mean, it's two million people who have
been displaced and lost their country.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, you have opposed President
Obama's engagement from the beginning.
What should happen now, now that Fidel Castro
is dead?
ANA QUINTANA: Well, now I think it's time
to reassess these past two years and recognize
that this policy has been a failure, right?
And it's notwithstanding the death of Fidel
Castro, but this year alone, there have been
over 10,000 politically motivated arrests.
Persecution against the religious community
on the island has increased significantly.
Churches by the hundreds are being bulldozed.
And that's something that is not being focused
on.
So, I think, moving forward, president-elect
Trump has a significant opportunity to kind
of revert back these unilateral concessions,
these unilateral executive actions that President
Obama implemented and really put the ball
back in the United States' court and say,
you know what, Cuba?
You should free all your political prisoners,
and before we continue normalizing relations.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, how far do you push this?
For example, should president-elect Trump
-- well, there is a recently opened embassy.
Right?
ANA QUINTANA: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Should that be closed again?
ANA QUINTANA: Well, not specifically.
But I think, moving forward, so, President
Obama has implemented about 52 to 53 executive
actions, many of them allowing for financing
for the regime, or allowing for business opportunities
for the regime for military and state-owned
enterprises.
I think that's where we should start.
I think we should put a cap back on remittances
for Cuban military and intelligence officials.
These are the same security officials that
are using this money to arrest and conduct
significant repression against the dissidents
on the island.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, but to the extent that
things are already happening, there's already
the case of Starwood Hotels, own by Marriott,
right?
ANA QUINTANA: Sure.
JEFFREY BROWN: Has taken a deal with the Cuban
government to take over a government-run hotel.
ANA QUINTANA: Sure.
JEFFREY BROWN: Should that be rescinded, that
kind of thing that has already started?
Should we roll back those kind of things?
ANA QUINTANA: Yes, well, that's something
that is owned and operated by the Cuban military.
So, any company that wants to engage in financial
commercial exchanges with the military is
taking a very big risk.
But I think the purpose of President Obama's
Cuban policy wasn't to enrich the Cuban military
or the security apparatuses of the country.
It was to improve the economic conditions
and the political conditions for the Cuban
people.
That's exactly what the senator just said.
But two years later, we're recognizing the
only people who's benefiting is the dictatorship.
There is no such thing as dictator-down economics.
The people are not benefiting.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right, but the senator also
said that this all happened after many, many
years of nothing, of a policy that wasn't
working.
That was the argument for re-engagement.
ANA QUINTANA: Yes.
Well, I think that's false.
The policy -- we can't say the policy didn't
work.
The policy wasn't meant for regime change.
The policy was meant to protect the American
citizens that are now -- they are now owed
upwards of $8 billion in uncompensated assets,
in money that was seized of theirs by the
regime.
And that's why the policy was put in place.
And moving forward, that's something that
should be kept in line.
I mean, these Americans have not been repaid
the money that was taken away from them.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just very briefly, in our last
minute here, the impact of U.S. businesses
that do want to go over there, right, that
are already there or that are -- they're itching
to get in?
ANA QUINTANA: Well, I think what's happening
is, we are replicating -- the United States
government is allowing for American businesses
to dictate its foreign policy towards Cuba.
So we're replicating the situation that was
existing before Castro, right, where U.S.
businesses had a great relationship with the
dictator Batista, and he -- and this is what's
dominating U.S.-Cuba relations.
And the people who are suffering in this,
it's the 11 million Cuban people who are still
on the island and Cuba's democratic dissidents.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ana Quintana, thank you very
much.
ANA QUINTANA: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: And now to coal and the challengesof cleaning up old mines.
With some coal companies in bankruptcy, the
money need to pay for cleanup is not always
available.
Public media's Inside Energy and The Allegheny
Front teamed up to report from two of the
country's largest coal-producing states.
Leigh Paterson takes us first to Western Pennsylvania.
LEIGH PATERSON: It is a nice day for a walk
in the woods.
But this is not a hiking trail.
ERIC CAVAZZA, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection: This site is known as the Fredericktown
refuse pile.
Some people call it the Black Dog Hollow refuse
pile as well.
LEIGH PATERSON: A coal refuse pile made upof rocks and low-quality coal.
ERIC CAVAZZA: And then the reject material
was just trammed and then conveyored up on
the hill and dumped on this giant pile and
left.
LEIGH PATERSON: That was over 70 years ago.
The coal mine nearby changed hands as companies
went bankrupt.
Now the pile is a hazard.
There are hundreds of sites like this one
in Pennsylvania, and there are tens of thousands
of abandoned mine sites scattered across the
country.
ERIC CAVAZZA: They can catch on fire.
This particular pile isn't burning that we
are aware of, but many of these do catch on
fire.
LEIGH PATERSON: Like one in Eynon, Pennsylvania,that was put out in 2015.
Cavazza once fell into a burning pile himself
while investigating a fire years ago.
ERIC CAVAZZA: It was very scary.
It was like walking onto a trap door and having
somebody pull the string, because you just
dropped.
And I was in over my head in a hole.
And there was smoke all around me.
LEIGH PATERSON: Not all problems with abandoned
mine sites are straight out of an action movie,
but they're still significant.
When it rains, these coal refuse piles candischarge some nasty stuff.
This so-called acid mine drainage can contaminate
streams and sometimes even impact the local
water supply.
Homeowners, like the ones who live around
this pile, deal with pipes and sewers that
get clogged with runoff.
ERIC CAVAZZA: So it's a big maintenance issue
for the township.
LEIGH PATERSON: Cavazza, as the head of the
bureau that deals directly with abandoned
mine remediation, wants these piles cleaned
up.
But it's expensive, and money to do the cleanup
is tight.
A lot of it comes from something called the
Abandoned Mine Land fund, or AML.
ERIC CAVAZZA: The fund is generated by the
active mining industry, and the country is
beginning to move away from coal as a primary
source of electricity generation.
LEIGH PATERSON: And with coal production at
its lowest level in 30 years, there's simply
less money coming in.
In Pennsylvania alone, AML funding has droppedby over 25 percent since 2013.
In Wyoming, the worry is about future cleanup
costs.
How thick is that seam right there?
BLAKE JONES, Technical Services Manager: Thirty-five-feet-thick.
LEIGH PATERSON: These pits are huge, and are
generally filled in as mining operations progress.
BLAKE JONES: The area that you see mining
right now will look like this in approximately
two years.
LEIGH PATERSON: This green, grassy area right
next to the mine was a mine itself just a
few years ago.
It has since been filled in and reseeded as
part of the complicated, lengthy cleanup process
known as reclamation.
RICK CURTSINGER, Spokesman, Cloud Peak Energy:
For part of the leasing process, before any
mining begins, mines are required to have
a reclamation plan.
LEIGH PATERSON: And something called reclamation
bonding.
RICK CURTSINGER: That's a guarantee, an insurance
that we will accomplish the reclamation that's
outlined as part of that lease.
LEIGH PATERSON: So, basically, a payment to
make sure future mine cleanup gets done.
Regulations in some states allow coal producers
to self-bond, which means companies promise
to pay for cleanup based on their financial
strength.
The problem comes when those companies become
financially shaky and those cleanup money
gets tied up in bankruptcy court.
In Wyoming, over the course of this year,
we're talking about over a billion dollars.
Pat Sweeney (ph) has been working on Western
land issues for decades and even lobbied for
the 1977 federal law that regulates coal mine
cleanup.
He puts this problem into perspective.
PAT SWEENEY, Activist: Remember, the circumstances
were so different then, too, because you had
viable companies that, at the time, no one
ever thought there might be companies going
bankrupt.
No one thought, in some respects, that there
would be a change in energy policy.
LEIGH PATERSON: Cloud Peak Energy, the coal
company that took us on the reclamation tour,
is not one of the companies in bankruptcy,
and is moving away from the practice of self-bonding.
But with some of the largest coal companies
in the country working out reclamation details
during and after bankruptcy, the future of
cleanup is unclear.
LEIGH PATERSON: For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Leigh Paterson.
JOHN YANG: We will be back with an excerpt
of a 1985 interview with Fidel Castro by our
own Robert MacNeil.
But, first, take a moment to hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your support, which
helps keep programs like ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JOHN YANG: Finally tonight: an excerpt from
an interview done by our own Robert MacNeil
with the late Fidel Castro.
Conducted in 1985, MacNeil asks Castro to
describe how the Cuban Missile Crisis began.
Castro said that after the Bay of Pigs invasion
in 1961, Cuba and the Soviet Union feared
additional U.S. invasions into Cuba.
FIDEL CASTRO, Cuban President (through translator):
The Soviets had that concern, and we naturally
had the same concern.
ROBERT MACNEIL: This is after the Bay of Pigs?
FIDEL CASTRO (through translator): Yes, after
the Bay of Pigs.
They asked us what measures we thought couldoffer Cuba some guarantees.
The most sure one was the fact that an aggression
against Cuba mean an aggression against the
Soviet Union.
That was the thesis that we put forth.
The concrete idea of the missiles was theirs.
I explained it, and we accepted it, but without
any hesitation, because we were being harassed.
An invasion had just taken place.
The pirate attacks were continuing constantly.
Constant mention was being made of an invasion
against Cuba.
ROBERT MACNEIL: When the crisis was at its
very height, did you personally think, did
you believe that nuclear war was a possibility
on one of those days?
FIDEL CASTRO (through translator): Yes.
Yes, I believed that as a possibility.
ROBERT MACNEIL: What did you feel about yourrole in having brought it to
that point?
FIDEL CASTRO (through translator): It wasn't
me.
It was the United States, the one that led
us to that point.
It was the United States that initiated the
blockade, that initiated, organized the invasion,
the sabotage, the pirate attacks, the mercenary
regiment, and those that spoke of an invasion
against Cuba.
It was the United States.
It wasn't us.
And I believe that we answered correctly.
I have no doubt whatsoever.
ROBERT MACNEIL: After Khrushchev decided to
withdraw the missiles, which you protested,
what did he say to you, did Nikita Khrushchev?
Did he say to you, we have made a big mistake,we shouldn't have done this?
What did he say?
FIDEL CASTRO (through translator): Look, we
wouldn't have opposed seeking a solution.
When the war came very close, then the leaders
of these two big powers became more aware
about the danger.
They worked.
They were able to achieve detente.
But, at that time, we were not in conformity.
We were not pleased.
Now, then, after 15 years elapsed, it was
proven that they were right, that a war, a
nuclear war, was avoided andthat Cuba wasn't invaded.
JOHN YANG: Online, "PBS NewsHour" special
correspondent Spencer Michels recounts the
day in 1959 when Fidel Castro spoke to his
class at Princeton.
Fresh off the success of his revolution, Castropromised he'd hold elections.
But, of course, they never came.
Read more about his speech on our Web site
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
And again to our honor roll of American service
personnel killed in the Middle East conflicts.
We add them as their deaths are made official
and photographs become available.
Here, in silence, are three more.
And that's the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday: a look at charter schools and
the controversy surrounding their expansion
within African-American communities.
I'm John Yang.
Join us online and again here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS NewsHour," thanks,
and good night.